monarchy it is no accident the united
kingdom has an unusual history in terms
of a strange coupling of dynamism and
stability often these two things are in
tension or even apparent conflict
something stable remains the same so
usually cannot be dynamic for dynamism
tends to cause instability while we
cannot attribute this entirely to the
existence of a constitutional monarchy
we cannot completely ignore it either
the british parliamentary system known
as the westminster system is inherited
by many democratic nations to a greater
or lesser extent but it's never yet been
improved upon political dynamism
involves great swings in terms of ideas
ideologies leaders and outlooks the
metaphorical great swing of a pendulum
but a pendulum is not a pendulum at all
if it is not anchored at its pivot the
pivot does not move in a real sense a
parliament is the pendulum a simple
pendulum swings side to side while a
double pendulum a pendulum attached to a
pendulum can do that and far more
displaying so-called chaotic motion
which is really just extremely complex
and impossible to predict behavior in
both cases simple or double the pendulum
is anchored to the immovable pivot the
pivot is like the monarchy immovable
stable the monarchy in britain and the
commonwealth acts as a so-called head of
state
in australia the position is a
figurative with the monarch's powers
invested in the position of governor
general but a queen or king in this
system are not rulers in the sense they
make no rules unlike the politicians
monarchs suggest no policy and have no
authority to make any indeed should the
parliament itself stop moving and be
unable to do its job of making the rules
itself becoming motionless like the
pivot a technical example of this is is
when the opposition parties blocked the
supply of money to the government in
australia in 1975 the power of the
monarchy through the governor general
was able to get the whole thing moving
again by dismissing the government of
the day this is known as the use of the
monarchs or their representatives
reserve powers
in australia the one time that has ever
happened remains controversial to today
the crown is the dignified and the
parliament is the efficient wrote walter
baycot in his 1867 work the english
constitution this distinction between
the dignified and the efficient
separates out the almost entirely
symbolic part of the system versus the
way things are actually achieved in
modern science type language the crown
is the constant and the parliament is
the variable there are differences we
can observe in the real world between
the british system and other places
for example in continental europe
countries like france with its violent
revolution in the past and its more
concentrated power in their presidency
or germany spain and italy with their
falls into fascism and more modern
tendency to favor more collectivist or
authoritarian solutions such leaps to
extremism and authoritarianism of
various kinds have not plagued britain
to the same extent though there has been
revolution the republic was short-lived
and a return to the constitutional
monarchy swift the rule is britain is
stable and yet dynamic it is stable
while undergoing rapid change rapid
progress this occurs because of a
particular kind of tradition a tradition
of criticism that originated in britain
and remains there as the preeminent
example of it politically and culturally
they are the british from the highest
god's eye view typically not trying to
find the once and for all right answer
or the once and for all good leader to
be installed and make things finally
right
there is no finally right only
incremental progress there need be no
final perfect law it is rather a
scientific approach to politics there's
as popper explained through the
parallels he drew between those
disciplines parallels between democracy
and science the distinction between
science and non-science and between good
democratic institutions and their
opposite an institution is judged by
popper to be democratic to the extent it
allows its rules and rulers to be
removed most easily without violence but
again the monarch is not a ruler in that
sense
for they do not make rules that
institution is the pivot around which
the change occurs and there needs to be
a pivot without it there is no structure
at all no tension no movement and no
progress in australia all the authority
of the monarch in terms of so-called
reserve powers is invested in the
governor general who is appointed by the
monarch on the advice of the government
of the day but the monarchy which in the
australian nation means the queen or
king of england is actually also the
queen or king of australia a
constitutional monarchy maintains the
constant stability allowing for the
changes parliament brings to remove that
stability to remove that very thing that
has facilitated our dynamic society
would be dangerous especially if
experimenting with an unknown like for
example a directly elected president in
australia which is what some people have
suggested
because then we'd have two seats of
power two rulers the parliament and an
elected president elected presumably
based on a contest between candidates
with opposing policies politicizing the
head of state position a constitutional
monarchy generates stability because of
inexplicit knowledge means instantiated
into the very fabric of the system we do
not understand all the reasons why this
particular system works so well rather
like we do not know all the reasons why
science allows progress to be made the
point is they both do work and as ways
of doing things both have proven
themselves over and again when tested
against reality science can help explain
why progress occurs the rapid change we
are now all used to but at the same time
something like a constitutional monarchy
a westminster parliamentary system of
democracy
also explains why this rapid change does
not cause great instability as rapid
change has caused in the past to other
civilizations because the stability is
deeply embedded as a system of ideas
means inexplicably often in complex
resilient institutions and the monarchy
is one such